The final discussion
we're going to give here
will look at the cons,
look at the downsides.
And of course, there will
always be cons with everything.
As I always like to say, and now
I finally can visualize this,
not everything is
unicorns and rainbows.
Here's actually a unicorn
with a rainbow coloring.
So this is a classic example
of unicorns and rainbows.
So we don't want to think
that parallel streams is
all unicorns and rainbows.
There's some things that
will just drive you crazy.
One of the first
obvious limitations
is, not every problem can
be expressed via the split,
apply, combine model,
which tends to force you
into somewhat of
a Procrustean bed,
where if you can live with this
divide and conquer-like thing,
it works great.
If you can't, you're
kind of out of luck.
If you don't like
that model, you
might be able to leverage
things like the Java
fork join framework
in some ways,
as well we'll talk about later.
Another issue is, if the
behaviors that you want to run
are not stateless and
are not thread safe,
then race conditions can occur.
And of course, those occur
when you end up with programs
depending on sequence
or timing for threads
to operate properly.
I think we've seen already,
through the discussion
about the trySplit
method in the search
with parallel
spliterator example
that parallel spliterators
can be tricky,
so they're hard
to write if you're
doing something sophisticated.
A good example of where
unit tests come in handy.
Interestingly enough,
concurrent collectors
are often a lot easier to write.
They're just not as complicated.
The main thing you
need to do is just pick
the mutable result container
that will be thread safe,
and away you go.
And that's usually
something you can just
get right off the shelf.
Another potential downside
is, all parallel streams
share a common ForkJoinPool.
Now, from one point of
view, that's actually a win,
because it gives better global
visibility into the resource
utilization.
But there might be situations
where the ForkJoinPool is not
your cup of tea, and the
parallel strings framework
forces you into that
Procrustean bed,
if you will, of thread
pool and resource fork.
Interestingly enough the Java
CompletableFutures framework
does not have this limitation.
A Java completable future
can have its own thread
pool that's a custom pool.
It's a predefined triple
other than the ForkJoinPool.
So there's additional
degrees of flexibility
to be found with the
CompletableFutures
framework that's not
there for ForkJoinPool
and the common ForkJoinPool
for the parallel streams.
As a consequence
of the fact that we
share a common
ForkJoinPool, you really
need to understand how to
apply and manage blockers.
That's really important
to get your head around.
The streams framework
also incurs some overhead.
Not surprisingly, really,
splitting and combining
takes some time.
The fork join framework
might have some overheads.
There's a really funny--
at least, funny to me--
screed, polemic, if
you will, written
by a person who really,
really, really hates
the ForkJoinPool model in Java.
And he wrote this thing talking
about the ForkJoinPool blunder
and what a terrible
mess it is and so on.
And I think his concerns
are sort of overblown.
Basically, his
points he's making
are that if you wanted to
write your own custom thread
pool for some very
specialized application,
you probably could come up
with a more optimized approach
than the ForkJoinPool.
And he's probably right.
But who the heck wants to
go through that headache?
The ForkJoinPool works really
well, it scales up nicely,
it's been tested with an inch of
its life, it's well maintained,
it gets better every release.
So yes, you could probably write
everything in assembly code
and get it to be faster
and more scalable, too.
But is it worth it?
The answer, largely, is no.
So it's a pretty
amusing document
to read to see
what he has to say.
I don't think it really has had
much of an impact over time.
There are cases,
of course, where
the Java CompletableFutures
framework can
be more efficient and scalable.
We've seen that it runs
faster for certain use cases,
especially things
that are I/O-bound.
And you may want to use that
framework in those cases.
So be aware that it
exists, and learn
how it works when we talk
about it later in this course.
Naturally, your
mileage may vary.
So sometimes, parallel
streams will work better.
Sometimes, computable
futures will work better.
It really helps to
benchmark things.
And to help do that,
there's actually
a benchmarking framework called
the Java micro-benchmarking
harness, or JMH,
and you can use that
to help run benchmarks
of parallel code
to do things like warm
up the thread pools
and warm up the
just-in-time compiler
and other things that otherwise
make your performance, highly
variable, distracting
you from what
the real benefits of parallelism
them might happen to be.
So to wrap up our
discussion of Java parallel
streams, as I mentioned
before, there's
a trade-off between programmer
productivity and computing
performance.
As a general rule of
thumb, completable futures
are more efficient and
scalable but a bit harder
to program, for reasons
we'll see later.
However, for the
majority of use cases--
I won't say vast
majority of use cases,
but for the majority
of use cases,
going from a sequential
stream to a parallel stream
is a straightforward
thing to do.
You can debug your program
using the simplicity
of sequential programming.
Once it's working,
you flip on the switch
to make it run parallel.
And so for many use cases
that's the way to go.
Even though it's possible to
write implementations using
completable features
that will run, faster
it's often not worth the
effort, unless you really
have to wrangle every
last nanosecond out
of your computing performance
requirement budget.
Great coverage of
parallel streams
appears in this book
Modern Java in Action
so I highly recommend
you take a look at it.
And I'm sure you'll
learn as much of it
from it as I did when
I used it to learn
how all these techniques
work several years ago.